David Shainberg Reviewer 1 Dates back to
the 11th or 10th century BC. And it's
known among Sumerian scholars as dialogue
on pessimism. Well, that's one set of
scholars think of this poem as a dialogue
on pessimism. The other set of scholars,
presumably now as numerous, claims that
it's being sort of a theatrical skit.
Well, you will decide yourself what it is.
If you can help it in the course of my
reading it to you, don't just laugh. Don't
laugh so readily.
Well, it's about two pages, basically.
slave come slave come to my service slave
come to my service yes my master yes quick
fetch my chariot hitch up the course the
horses i'll drive to the palace drive to
the palace my master drive to the palace
the king will be pleased to see you he
will be benevolent to you no slave i won't
go go to the palace. Don't, my master,
don't go to the palace. The king will send
you on a faraway expedition down the
unknown road through hostile mountains.
Day and night he will make you experience
pain and hardship. Slave, come to my
service. Yes, my master, yes. Fetch water,
pour it over my hands. I am to eat my
supper. Eat your supper, my master, eat
your supper. Frequent meals glutton one's
heart. Man's supper is the supper of his
God and clean hands catch the eye of
Shamash. No slave, I won't eat my supper.
Don't eat your supper, master. Don't eat
your supper. Drink and thirst, food and
hunger. Never leave men alone that alone
each other. Slave, come to my service.
Yes, my master, yes. Quick, fetch my
chariot, hitch up the horses. I'll go for
a ride in the country. Do that, my master,
do that. A carefree wanderer always feels
his belly. A stray dog always finds a
bone. A migrating swallow is especially
skilled in nesting. A wild donkey finds
the grass in the driest desert. No slave,
I won't go for a ride in the country.
Don't go, my master, don't bother. The lot
of a wanderer is always dicey. A stray dog
loses its teeth. The nest of a migrating
swallow gets buried in plaster. Naked
earth is a wild donkey's bedding. Slave,
come to my service. Yes, my master, yes. I
feel like starting a family, like
begetting children good thinking my master
start a family start a family who has
children secures his name repeated in
posthumous prayers no slave I won't start
a family I won't have children don't start
at my master don't have them a family is
like a broken door is hinges creaking only
a third of a once children are healthy two
-thirds always sickly so should I start a
family don't start a family who starts a
family waste his ancestral house slave
come to my service yes my master yes i
shall deal to my enemy in the court i will
still silent before my detractors right my
master right yield to your enemy keep
silence my master before detractors no
slave i won't be silent and i won't yield
don't heal my master and don't be silent
even if you don't open your mouth at all
your enemies will be merciless and cruel
to you as well as numerous slave come to
my service yes my master yes I feel looked
like doing some evil and do that my master
by all means do some evil for how
otherwise can you stuff your belly how
without doing evil you can you dress
yourself warmly no slave I shall do no
evil evil doers I either killed of laid
alive and blinded or blind and inflate
alive and thrown into a dungeon slave come
to my service Yes, my master, yes. I'll
fall in love with a woman. Fall in love
with my master. Fall in love. Who falls in
love with a woman forgets his griefs and
sorrows. No slave. I won't fall in love
with a woman. Don't love, my master. Don't
love. Woman is a snare, a trap, a dark
pit. Woman is a sharp steel blade slitting
man's throat in darkness. Slave, come to
my service. Yes, my master, yes. Quick
fetch water to wash my hands. I am to make
an offering to my God. Make an offering.
Make an offering. Who makes offering to
his God fills his heart with riches. He
feels generous and his purse is open. No
slave. I won't make an offering. Rightly
so, my master. Rightly so. Can you really
train your God to follow you like a
doggie? All the time he demands obedience,
retail, sacrifices. Slave, come to my
service. Yes, my master, yes. I will
invest with interest. I will loan for the
interest. Yes, invest with interest, make
loans for the interest. Who does,
preserves his own, his profit though is
enormous, is enormous. No slave, I won't
lend and I won't invest. Don't invest, my
master, don't lend. To lend is like loving
a woman, to receive like siring but
children. People always curse those whose
grain they eat. They resent you and try to
reduce your profit. Slave, come to my
service. Yes, my master, yes. I shall do a
good deed for my nation. Very good, my
master, very good. You do that. Who does
good deeds for his nation has his name in
Marduk's gold signet. No slave. I won't do
a good deed for my nation. Don't do that,
my master. Don't bother. Get up and stroll
across ancient ruins. scant the skulls of
simple folk and nobles. Which one of them
was a villain? Which one? A benefactor?
Slave, come to my service. Yes, my master,
yes. If all this is so, then what is good?
To have your neck broken and my neck
broken, to be thrown into a river, that's
what is good. Who is so tall as to reach
the heavens? Who is so broad as to embrace
plains and mountains? mountains. If that's
so, I should kill your slave. I'd rather
you go before me. And does my master
believe that he can survive for three days
without me?"
Well, and just one more poem.
Well, why don't I do this?
The title of this poem is New Life.
And reading it constitutes a world
premiere for this poem.
I'll try to go as slowly as possible about
the lines. New life.
Imagine that war is over, that peace has
resumed its reign, that you can still make
a mirror, that it's a cuckoo or a magpie
and not the junkers that chirps in the
twigs again. That the window frames not
the town's rubble but its rococo palms,
magnolias, pine trees, tenacious ivy,
grass, laurel. That the cast iron lace the
moon used to shepherd clouds in endured in
the end the onslaught of mimosa plus burst
of agave. That life must start from the
very threshold. People exit their rooms
whose chairs like letters B or else H,
shield them from vertigo on occasion. They
have used to nobody save themselves
pavement flagstones, the rules of
multiplication. Thus the impact of
statues, of the empty niches more
accurately. Well, failing sanctity one
still can use is by word. Imagine that
this is all true. Imagine you speak of
yourself while speaking of them of
anything extra, side word. Life Life
starts in you indeed like this, with a
painted view of a volcanic eruption, of a
dinghy high wave's billiger, with that
attendant feeling it's only you who
surveyed the disaster, with the feeling
that you are eager to shift your gaze any
moment, catch sight of a couch, a blast of
peonies in Chinese ways, sallow against
the plaster. They garish colors, they
wilting mouths, must be in their turn
harbingers of a disaster. Each thing is
vulnerable. The very thought about the
thing gets quickly forgotten. Things are
in truth the leeches of thought. Hence
their shapes. Each one is a brain cut out.
The attachment to place. The Penelope
features that is taste for the future. At
sunrise a rooster is heard. Stepping out
of the tub, wrapped in the bed sheets,
leaning in a hotel. In the new life you
learn the the herd of four-legged
furniture, mahogany, and cast iron.
Imagine that epics shrink into idylls,
that words about the converse of flames,
long tongues, of that raging sermon which
used to devour your betters greedily like
dry wood, that flame found it difficult to
determine your worth, not to mention
warmth. That's why you've survived intact.
That's why you can stomach apathy. That's
why you feel fit to mingle with Pomona,
Vertumni, Ceres, this place is packed
with. That's why on your lips is this
shepherd's jingle. For how long can one
justify oneself? However you hide the ace,
the table gets hit with jacks of some old
suit or tailor. Imagine the more sincere
the voice, the less it retains the trace
of love for no matter what, of anger, of
tears, of terror. Imagine your wireless
catching at times your old anthems hum.
Imagine that here too each letter is
trailed by a weaning retinue of its likes,
forming blindly now Betsy, now Ibrahim,
dragging the pen past the limits of
alphabet and meaning. Twilight in the the
new life, cicadas that don't relent, a
classicist perspective that lacks a tank
or burying that dank fog patches to
obfuscate its end, a bare parquet floor
that never sustained a tango. In the new
life they don't beg the moment, stay,
brought to a standstill, it quickly
succumbs to dotage, and your features on
top of that are glazed enough anyway to
scratch on their mat side high and attach
the postage. The white stuccoed walls of a
room are turning more white because of a
glance shot in their direction and boding
censure, steep not so much in great
meadows' morose repose as in the
spectrum's lack of their self-negating
tincture. A thing can be pardoned plenty,
especially when it comes, zones, where it
reaches its end, ultimately one's unbound
curiosity about these empty zones, about
this objectless vista is what art seems to
be all about. In the new life, a cloud is
better than the bright sun. The rain, akin
to self-knowledge, appears perpetual. On
the other hand, an unexpected train you
don't wait for alone on the platform
arrives on schedule. A sail is passing its
judgment on the horizon's lie. The eye
tracks the sleeping self, though it's the
foam that's famous. And should anyone ask
you, who are you? You reply, who? I? I am
nobody, as Ulysses once muttered to
Polyphemus.
That's an old poem. Okay, I'll do that.
I was asked to read you one more poem.
It's an old poem indeed, and if I can find
it, I'll read it to you.
Well, let me see. Maybe I should look at
the table of comments.
Charles Junkerman from Humanity Center
asked me to read this poem and I can't
deny my host.
The title of this poem is, it's an old
poem, it's about 20 years ago, it's called
Odysseus to Telemachus.
My dear Telemachus, the Trojan War is over
now. I don't recall who won it, the Greeks
no doubt, for only they would leave so
many dead so far from their own homeland.
But still, my homeward way has proved too
long. While we were wasting time there,
old Poseidon, it almost seems, stretched
an extended space. I don't know where I am
or what this place can be. It would appear
some filthy island with bushes, buildings
and great grunting hunting pigs, a garden
choked with weeds, some queen or other,
grass and huge stones. Telemachus, my son,
to wander the faces of all islands
resemble one another and the mind trips
numbering waves, eyes soar from sea
horizons, run and the flesh of water
stuffs the ears. I can't remember how the
war came out, even how old you are, I
can't remember. Remember, grow up then, my
Telemachus, grow strong. Only the gods
know if we'll see each other again. You've
long since ceased to be that babe before
whom I reined in the plowing bullocks. Had
it not been for Palamedes' trick, we two
would still be living in one household.
But maybe he was right. Away from me. You
are quite safe from all Oedipal passions.
And your dreams, my Telemachus, are
blameless.
Okay, I read this poem in Russian.
odyssey telemark my telemark Trojan war is
over who won I don't remember there must
be Greeks so many dead people can't be
thrown away only Greeks can and still the
host home the road The road seemed too
long, like Poseidon While we were there,
we lost time, stretched the space I don't
know where I am, what's in front of me
Some dirty island, bushes, buildings,
growling of pigs A overgrown garden, some
kind of queen, grass to the stones A cute
telemark, all the islands look like each
other a young manter
from
me I don't remember how the war ended And
how old you are now I don't remember Grow
up, my big telemark, grow up Only the gods
know Will we meet again You are no longer
the same young man Before whom I held the
bulls Like a long-lived palm tree We lived
together But maybe he's right Without me
you are saved from the passions of the
Oedipus, and your dreams, my telemark, are
flawless.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. You appear to be very
patient people. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.